Lupsasca, a theoretical physicist at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, is the project scientist for the Black Hole 
Explorer. His work has illuminated the potential properties of the photon ring the researchers aim to detect. 
The project’s goal is to put a space-based radio telescope in Earth orbit in 2031.
By joining forces with other radio telescopes on the ground, it would effectively create a telescope three times the 
size of Earth. That would allow scientists to take the sharpest images in the history of astronomy, Lupsasca says, 
and hopefully reveal the photon ring.
This summer, the capabilities of AI startled Lupsasca. When he prodded the large language model GPT-5 Pro, 
it reproduced the conclusion of one of his papers, deducing in minutes what he’d spent weeks pondering. In October, 
he also joined OpenAI for Science, where he’ll continue researching black holes.
Only in the late ’80s, I think, indirect evidence for the presence of black holes in certain galaxies 
finally changed most people’s minds, but we still didn’t have direct contact with black holes until the last decade. 
First with LIGO, the Laser Interferometer for Gravitational-Wave Observatory that discovered the first gravitational 
waves produced by two black holes merging. So that was a direct probe, through gravity, of real black holes in the sky. 
Really amazing moment. And then very soon after, in 2019, the Event Horizon Telescope released the first image of the 
black hole.
So now we can hear them through gravitational waves and we can even see them. 
And that’s absolutely a remarkable shift because this purely theoretical subject, which used to be even quite esoteric 
and people even think black holes weren’t a thing for a long time, now is an experimental science. 
And it’s an experimental science that is at the observational frontier in astronomy. And I think we’re going to 
learn so much about all these different phenomena that have really been mysterious for so long. And that’s a really 
exciting time to be working in this field.
The Black Hole Explorer is this really exciting, proposed space mission to launch a satellite into Earth orbit 
that will take the sharpest images in the history of astronomy and allow us to make high-resolution movies of 
black holes. And one of the main targets of this experiment is this so-called photon ring, which is a very thin, 
narrow ring of light that is predicted by Einstein’s theory of general relativity to encircle this dark patch in a 
black hole image that is produced by the event horizon.
So, our theoretical predictions coming, again, from our best theory to date, which is Einstein’s theory of 
general relativity, predicts that when you look at an image of a black hole, you should roughly see two main features. 
One is a dark patch, which is often called the black hole shadow that’s cast by the black hole because the event horizon absorbs light. 
Around this dark patch, you should see a very thin ring of light that we call the photon ring. And this ring of light is produced by photons, 
particles of light, that orbit around the black hole, possibly multiple times on their way from their source, which is some hot matter around 
the black hole, to the observer, which is our telescope. Only a black hole can bend light so much that it actually orbits around it.